---
title: Understanding HTTP Caching
date: 2020-05-14 11:30:00 +0200
categories: [Web]
tags: [http, web]
toc: true
---

## Server caches and Downstream caches
HTTP caching mechanisms can be a bit confusing at first so let's start clarifying them a bit. I would like to start by noting 
that in a typical client web server architecture there isn't only one cache, there are many. There are server side caches and downstream caches. 
A server side cache can be a key-value store like redis or memcached for example. Apart from that there are also the so called downstream 
caches that store the response after it has left "the server". The most obvious downstream cache is the browser's cache. 
Have in mind though that there can be additional downstream caches between the server and the browser, 
for example your ISP's cache.  

In any case, you have the power to control the behaviour of these caches or in other words when and how a response is stored 
and retrieved from them, using HTTP headers. Headers like `Cache-Control`, `Expires`, `ETag`, `Last-Modified` and `Vary`. 
Let's dig into them...

## Cache-Control max-age and Expires
`Cache-Control` has many directives one of which is the `max-age` with which you can define for how many seconds after the first request, you
want the response to be stored in a cache. If a request for the same resource is done within this time frame then the cached response will be used no matter what.
`Expires` on the other hand does the same thing, with the difference that you define a specific date and time until which the cached response is valid. 
This has the disadvantage that if there are a lot of clients with the same cached data and the same Expires header, all these responses 
will expire at the same time and all clients might request the new resource at the same time overloading your servers. In any case 
the `Cache-Control` header is newer, more versatile and takes precedence over `Expires` if both are present. So the only reason you might want
to still use the Expires header is for outdated downstream caches which might not support the `Cache-Control` header yet.  

## ETag and Last-Modified
At first the browser checks the `Cache-Control` or `Expires` headers to determine whether or not to make a request to the server. 
If it has to make a request, then there are some additional headers that control what happens next. Meet `Etag` and `Last-Modified` response headers.
`ETag` is usually a checksum of the response which means that it changes whenever the response changes while `Last-Modified` 
is a datetime which declares when the response was last modified. These values are both calculated by your server. If an `ETag` 
header is present in a response, for example `ETag: "value_01"` and the browser makes a request for that resource, then 
it will add the request header `If-None-Match: "value_01"`. The server will calculate the ETag value for that response and if it 
matches the one that came with the request, it will respond with a status code 304 (Not Modified) and an empty body. So the cached value will be used.
If the response has changed, then the ETag value calculated by the server will be different and a new response will be created and send to the client. 
`Last-Modified` works in a similar way but instead of calculating and comparing a checksum value it calculates and compares a datetime value. 
The browser sends an `If-Modified-Since: <date and time>` request header. You can choose to use whichever of the two best suits you.
 
## ETag example
- Browser_A makes a GET request for page_1
- Page_1 doesn’t exist in browser’s_A cache. The request reaches the server. It doesn’t exist in the server cache. It is calculated. The response is added in the server cache along with its ETag value written as a response header. The response reaches the browser, is stored in its own cache and is presented to the user. 
- Browser_B requests the same page_1. It is not in its cache. The request reaches the server but the response is not calculated again since it exists in the server cache from where is retrieved and returned to the browser.
- Browser_A requests the page_1 again. Since there is no Expires or Cache-Control max age headers, only an ETag, it doesn’t get the page from ts cache but sends a request to the server along with its cached ETag value. The server calculates the current ETag value for that page. If it hasn’t changed then it responds with a simple 304 not modified response. The response reaches the browser which serves the user with its cached page.
- The database is updated which means that page_1 changes and a new ETag value must be generated for it. Browser_A requests page_1. The server calculates the ETag value and sees that it doesn’t match with the request's ETag value. It runs its business logic to calculate the new response and sends it to the browser. The browser serves it to the user and updates its cache with the new page_1 that has a new ETag header

## Caching variable and private data
Caching is an excellent efficiency boost, but there’s a danger to it. Cached data is stored as key-value pairs and many 
systems create the key for a web page from its url. The problem is that the same url might return different content 
based on which user sees the page or based on any other variable like if the client is a mobile device or not. 
Extra care must be taken for cases like this and the solution is the use of the `Vary` header. Using this header 
you can vary a response based on any request header. For example, if you define `Vary: User-Agent` then the 
caching servers should consider the user agent when deciding whether to serve the page from cache or not. If the `User-Agent` 
request header is the same with the one that was used when the page was first cached, then the page will be retrieved 
from the cache. Otherwise a request to the server will be made, a new response will be received and will overwrite 
the current cached version.

In other scenarios there are pages that contain private information which you don't want to save on any public cache 
like the ISP's cache for example, but only in private caches like the client browser's cache. For these cases you can
use the versatile Cache-Control header with the private directive, `Cache-Control: private`. For very sensitive data 
like credit card details that you don't want to be stored at all you can use `Cache-Control: no-store`.

## HTTP Caching in django
